manual/source/pool/ams.rst, before:

.. Sources:

    `<https://info.ravenbrook.com/project/mps/master/manual/wiki/pool_classes.html>`_
    `<https://info.ravenbrook.com/project/mps/master/design/poolams/>`_

.. index::
   single: AMS
   single: pool class; AMS

.. _pool-ams:

AMS (Automatic Mark and Sweep)
==============================

**AMS** is an :term:`automatically managed <automatic memory
management>` but :term:`non-moving <non-moving garbage collector>`
:term:`pool class`. It should be used instead of :ref:`pool-amc` for
blocks that need to be automatically managed, but cannot be moved.

AMS does not use :term:`generational garbage collection`, but when
creating a pool you use a :term:`generation chain` to specify the
capacity and mortality of a single "generation". These numbers are
used to schedule the collection of the whole pool.

.. note::

    AMS is likely to be useful as a step in integrating a program with
    the MPS. It allows you to work on scanning (and investigate errors
    resulting from underscanning) without having to deal with objects
    moving as well. When you are confident that scanning is correct,
    you can switch to :ref:`pool-amc`.

    AMS is not currently suitable for production use. However, it
    could be developed into a solid mark-and-sweep pool. If you have a
    use case that needs this, :ref:`contact us <contact>`.


.. index::
   single: AMS; properties

AMS properties
--------------

* Does not support allocation via :c:func:`mps_alloc` or deallocation
  via :c:func:`mps_free`.

* Supports allocation via :term:`allocation points`. If an allocation
  point is created in an AMS pool, the call to
  :c:func:`mps_ap_create_k` takes no keyword arguments.

* Supports :term:`allocation frames` but does not use them to improve
  the efficiency of stack-like allocation.

* Does not support :term:`segregated allocation caches`.

* Garbage collections are scheduled automatically. See
  :ref:`topic-collection-schedule`.

* Blocks may contain :term:`exact references` to blocks in the same or
  other pools, or :term:`ambiguous references` (if the
  :c:macro:`MPS_KEY_AMS_SUPPORT_AMBIGUOUS` keyword argument is set to
  true when creating the pool). Blocks may not contain :term:`weak
  references (1)`, and may not use :term:`remote references`.

* Allocations may be variable in size.

* The :term:`alignment` of blocks is configurable.

* Blocks do not have :term:`dependent objects`.

* Blocks that are not :term:`reachable` from a :term:`root` are
  automatically :term:`reclaimed`.

* Blocks are :term:`scanned <scan>`.

* Blocks may only be referenced by :term:`base pointers` (unless they
  have :term:`in-band headers`).

* Blocks are not protected by :term:`barriers (1)`.

* Blocks do not :term:`move <moving garbage collector>`.

* Blocks may be registered for :term:`finalization`.

* Blocks must belong to an :term:`object format` which provides
  :term:`scan <scan method>` and :term:`skip <skip method>` methods.

* Blocks may have :term:`in-band headers`.


.. index::
   single: AMS; interface

AMS interface
-------------

::

   #include "mpscams.h"


.. c:function:: mps_class_t mps_class_ams(void)

    Return the :term:`pool class` for an AMS (Automatic Mark & Sweep)
    :term:`pool`.

    When creating an AMS pool, :c:func:`mps_pool_create_k` requires
    two :term:`keyword arguments`:

    * :c:macro:`MPS_KEY_FORMAT` (type :c:type:`mps_fmt_t`) specifies
      the :term:`object format` for the objects allocated in the pool.
      The format must provide a :term:`scan method` and a :term:`skip
      method`.

    * :c:macro:`MPS_KEY_CHAIN` (type :c:type:`mps_chain_t`) specifies
      the :term:`generation chain` for the pool. It must have a single
      generation.

    * :c:macro:`MPS_KEY_AMS_SUPPORT_AMBIGUOUS` (type
      :c:type:`mps_bool_t`, default false) specifies whether references
      may be ambiguous.

    For example::

        MPS_ARGS_BEGIN(args) {
            MPS_ARGS_ADD(args, MPS_KEY_CHAIN, chain);
            MPS_ARGS_ADD(args, MPS_KEY_FORMAT, fmt);
            MPS_ARGS_ADD(args, MPS_KEY_AMS_SUPPORT_AMBIGUOUS, 1);
            MPS_ARGS_DONE(args);
            res = mps_pool_create_k(&pool, arena, mps_class_ams(), args);
        } MPS_ARGS_END(args);

    .. deprecated:: starting with version 1.112.

        When using :c:func:`mps_pool_create`, pass the format and
        chain like this::

            mps_res_t mps_pool_create(mps_pool_t *pool_o, mps_arena_t arena, 
                                      mps_class_t mps_class_ams(),
                                      mps_fmt_t fmt,
                                      mps_chain_t chain,
                                      mps_bool_t support_ambiguous)

    When creating an :term:`allocation point` on an AMS pool,
    :c:func:`mps_ap_create_k` accepts one keyword argument:

    * :c:macro:`MPS_KEY_RANK` (type :c:type:`mps_rank_t`, default
      :c:func:`mps_rank_exact`) specifies the :term:`rank` of references
      in objects allocated on this allocation point. It must be
      :c:func:`mps_rank_exact` (if the objects allocated on this
      allocation point will contain :term:`exact references`), or
      :c:func:`mps_rank_ambig` (if the objects may contain
      :term:`ambiguous references`).

    For example::

        MPS_ARGS_BEGIN(args) {
            MPS_ARGS_ADD(args, MPS_KEY_RANK, mps_rank_ambig());
            MPS_ARGS_DONE(args);
            res = mps_ap_create_k(&ap, ams_pool, args);
        } MPS_ARGS_END(args);

    .. deprecated:: starting with version 1.112.

        When using :c:func:`mps_ap_create`, pass the rank like this::

            mps_res_t mps_ap_create(mps_ap_t *ap_o, mps_pool_t pool,
                                    mps_rank_t rank)


.. c:function:: mps_class_t mps_class_ams_debug(void)

    A :ref:`debugging <topic-debugging>` version of the AMS pool
    class.

    When creating a debugging AMS pool, :c:func:`mps_pool_create_k`
    requires three keyword arguments: :c:macro:`MPS_KEY_FORMAT` and
    :c:macro:`MPS_KEY_CHAIN` are as described above, and
    :c:macro:`MPS_KEY_POOL_DEBUG_OPTIONS` specifies the debugging
    options. See :c:type:`mps_debug_option_s`.

    .. deprecated:: starting with version 1.112.

        When using :c:func:`mps_pool_create`, pass the format,
        chain, and debugging options like this::

            mps_res_t mps_pool_create(mps_pool_t *pool_o, mps_arena_t arena, 
                                      mps_class_t mps_class_ams_debug(),
                                      mps_debug_option_s debug_option,
                                      mps_fmt_t fmt,
                                      mps_chain_t chain,
                                      mps_bool_t support_ambiguous)

Commit message:

Better user documentation for generation chains: * In the pool class properties table, note whether a pool class uses generational garbage collection. * The arena has a default generation chain. * The MPS_KEY_CHAIN keyword argument is now optional when creating an AMC, AMCZ or AMS pool. * The pool classes AWL and LO now take an optional MPS_KEY_CHAIN keyword argument. * The pool classes AMS, AWL and LO now take an optional MPS_KEY_GEN keyword argument specifying the generation for new objects. * Remove material about generation chains from the user guide (just use the arena's default generation chain).

manual/source/pool/ams.rst, after:

.. Sources:

    `<https://info.ravenbrook.com/project/mps/master/manual/wiki/pool_classes.html>`_
    `<https://info.ravenbrook.com/project/mps/master/design/poolams/>`_

.. index::
   single: AMS
   single: pool class; AMS

.. _pool-ams:

AMS (Automatic Mark and Sweep)
==============================

**AMS** is an :term:`automatically managed <automatic memory
management>` but :term:`non-moving <non-moving garbage collector>`
:term:`pool class`. It should be used instead of :ref:`pool-amc` for
blocks that need to be automatically managed, but cannot be moved.

.. note::

    AMS is likely to be useful as a step in integrating a program with
    the MPS. It allows you to work on scanning (and investigate errors
    resulting from underscanning) without having to deal with objects
    moving as well. When you are confident that scanning is correct,
    you can switch to :ref:`pool-amc`.

    AMS is not currently suitable for production use. However, it
    could be developed into a solid mark-and-sweep pool. If you have a
    use case that needs this, :ref:`contact us <contact>`.


.. index::
   single: AMS; properties

AMS properties
--------------

* Does not support allocation via :c:func:`mps_alloc` or deallocation
  via :c:func:`mps_free`.

* Supports allocation via :term:`allocation points`. If an allocation
  point is created in an AMS pool, the call to
  :c:func:`mps_ap_create_k` takes no keyword arguments.

* Supports :term:`allocation frames` but does not use them to improve
  the efficiency of stack-like allocation.

* Does not support :term:`segregated allocation caches`.

* Garbage collections are scheduled automatically. See
  :ref:`topic-collection-schedule`.

* Does not use :term:`generational garbage collection`, so blocks are
  never promoted out of the generation in which they are allocated.

* Blocks may contain :term:`exact references` to blocks in the same or
  other pools, or :term:`ambiguous references` (if the
  :c:macro:`MPS_KEY_AMS_SUPPORT_AMBIGUOUS` keyword argument is set to
  true when creating the pool). Blocks may not contain :term:`weak
  references (1)`, and may not use :term:`remote references`.

* Allocations may be variable in size.

* The :term:`alignment` of blocks is configurable.

* Blocks do not have :term:`dependent objects`.

* Blocks that are not :term:`reachable` from a :term:`root` are
  automatically :term:`reclaimed`.

* Blocks are :term:`scanned <scan>`.

* Blocks may only be referenced by :term:`base pointers` (unless they
  have :term:`in-band headers`).

* Blocks are not protected by :term:`barriers (1)`.

* Blocks do not :term:`move <moving garbage collector>`.

* Blocks may be registered for :term:`finalization`.

* Blocks must belong to an :term:`object format` which provides
  :term:`scan <scan method>` and :term:`skip <skip method>` methods.

* Blocks may have :term:`in-band headers`.


.. index::
   single: AMS; interface

AMS interface
-------------

::

   #include "mpscams.h"


.. c:function:: mps_class_t mps_class_ams(void)

    Return the :term:`pool class` for an AMS (Automatic Mark & Sweep)
    :term:`pool`.

    When creating an AMS pool, :c:func:`mps_pool_create_k` requires
    two :term:`keyword arguments`:

    * :c:macro:`MPS_KEY_FORMAT` (type :c:type:`mps_fmt_t`) specifies
      the :term:`object format` for the objects allocated in the pool.
      The format must provide a :term:`scan method` and a :term:`skip
      method`.

    * :c:macro:`MPS_KEY_CHAIN` (type :c:type:`mps_chain_t`) specifies
      the :term:`generation chain` for the pool. It must have a single
      generation.

    It accepts three optional keyword arguments:

    * :c:macro:`MPS_KEY_CHAIN` (type :c:type:`mps_chain_t`) specifies
      the :term:`generation chain` for the pool. If not specified, the
      pool will use the arena's default chain.

    * :c:macro:`MPS_KEY_GEN` (type :c:type:`unsigned`) specifies the
      :term:`generation` in the chain into which new objects will be
      allocated. If you pass your own chain, then this defaults to
      ``0``, but if you didn't (and so use the arena's default chain),
      then an appropriate generation is used.

      Note that AWL does not use generational garbage collection, so
      blocks remain in this generation and are not promoted.

    * :c:macro:`MPS_KEY_AMS_SUPPORT_AMBIGUOUS` (type
      :c:type:`mps_bool_t`, default false) specifies whether references
      may be ambiguous.

    For example::

        MPS_ARGS_BEGIN(args) {
            MPS_ARGS_ADD(args, MPS_KEY_FORMAT, fmt);
            MPS_ARGS_ADD(args, MPS_KEY_AMS_SUPPORT_AMBIGUOUS, 1);
            MPS_ARGS_DONE(args);
            res = mps_pool_create_k(&pool, arena, mps_class_ams(), args);
        } MPS_ARGS_END(args);

    .. deprecated:: starting with version 1.112.

        When using :c:func:`mps_pool_create`, pass the format,
        chain, and ambiguous flag like this::

            mps_res_t mps_pool_create(mps_pool_t *pool_o, mps_arena_t arena, 
                                      mps_class_t mps_class_ams(),
                                      mps_fmt_t fmt,
                                      mps_chain_t chain,
                                      mps_bool_t support_ambiguous)

    When creating an :term:`allocation point` on an AMS pool,
    :c:func:`mps_ap_create_k` accepts one keyword argument:

    * :c:macro:`MPS_KEY_RANK` (type :c:type:`mps_rank_t`, default
      :c:func:`mps_rank_exact`) specifies the :term:`rank` of references
      in objects allocated on this allocation point. It must be
      :c:func:`mps_rank_exact` (if the objects allocated on this
      allocation point will contain :term:`exact references`), or
      :c:func:`mps_rank_ambig` (if the objects may contain
      :term:`ambiguous references`).

    For example::

        MPS_ARGS_BEGIN(args) {
            MPS_ARGS_ADD(args, MPS_KEY_RANK, mps_rank_ambig());
            MPS_ARGS_DONE(args);
            res = mps_ap_create_k(&ap, ams_pool, args);
        } MPS_ARGS_END(args);

    .. deprecated:: starting with version 1.112.

        When using :c:func:`mps_ap_create`, pass the rank like this::

            mps_res_t mps_ap_create(mps_ap_t *ap_o, mps_pool_t pool,
                                    mps_rank_t rank)


.. c:function:: mps_class_t mps_class_ams_debug(void)

    A :ref:`debugging <topic-debugging>` version of the AMS pool
    class.

    When creating a debugging AMS pool, :c:func:`mps_pool_create_k`
    requires three keyword arguments: :c:macro:`MPS_KEY_FORMAT` and
    :c:macro:`MPS_KEY_CHAIN` are as described above, and
    :c:macro:`MPS_KEY_POOL_DEBUG_OPTIONS` specifies the debugging
    options. See :c:type:`mps_debug_option_s`.

    .. deprecated:: starting with version 1.112.

        When using :c:func:`mps_pool_create`, pass the format,
        chain, and debugging options like this::

            mps_res_t mps_pool_create(mps_pool_t *pool_o, mps_arena_t arena, 
                                      mps_class_t mps_class_ams_debug(),
                                      mps_debug_option_s debug_option,
                                      mps_fmt_t fmt,
                                      mps_chain_t chain,
                                      mps_bool_t support_ambiguous)
