manual/source/pool/mv.rst, before:

.. index::
   single: MV
   single: pool class; MV

.. _pool-mv:

MV (Manual Variable)
====================

.. deprecated:: starting with version 1.111.

    :ref:`pool-mvff` or :ref:`pool-mvt` should be used instead.

**MV** is a general-purpose :term:`manually managed <manual memory
management>` :term:`pool class` that manages :term:`blocks` of
variable size.


.. index::
   single: MV; properties

MV properties
-------------

* Supports allocation via :c:func:`mps_alloc` and deallocation via
  :c:func:`mps_free`.

* Does not support allocation via :term:`allocation points`.

* Does not support :term:`allocation frames`.

* Supports :term:`segregated allocation caches`.

* There are no garbage collections in this pool.

* Blocks may not contain :term:`references` to blocks in automatically
  managed pools (unless these are registered as :term:`roots`).

* Allocations may be variable in size.

* The :term:`alignment` of blocks is not configurable: it is the
  :term:`natural alignment` of the platform (see
  :c:macro:`MPS_PF_ALIGN`).

* Blocks do not have :term:`dependent objects`.

* Blocks are not automatically :term:`reclaimed`.

* Blocks are not :term:`scanned <scan>`.

* Blocks are not protected by :term:`barriers (1)`.

* Blocks do not :term:`move <moving garbage collector>`.

* Blocks may not be registered for :term:`finalization`.

* Blocks must not belong to an :term:`object format`.


.. index::
   single: MV; interface

MV interface
------------

::

   #include "mpscmv.h"

.. c:function:: mps_class_t mps_class_mv(void)

    Return the :term:`pool class` for an MV (Manual Variable)
    :term:`pool`.

    When creating an MV pool, :c:func:`mps_pool_create_k` may take
    three :term:`keyword arguments`:

    * :c:macro:`MPS_KEY_EXTEND_BY` (type :c:type:`size_t`, default 65536) is the
      :term:`size` of segment that the pool will request from the
      :term:`arena`.

    * :c:macro:`MPS_KEY_MEAN_SIZE` (type :c:type:`size_t`, default 32) is the
      predicted mean size of blocks that will be allocated from the
      pool.

    * :c:macro:`MPS_KEY_MAX_SIZE` (type :c:type:`size_t`, default 65536) is the
      predicted maximum size of blocks that will be allocated from the
      pool.

    The mean and maximum sizes are *hints* to the MPS: the pool will be
    less efficient if these are wrong, but nothing will break.

    For example::

        MPS_ARGS_BEGIN(args) {
            MPS_ARGS_ADD(args, MPS_KEY_MEAN_SIZE, 32);
            MPS_ARGS_ADD(args, MPS_KEY_MAX_SIZE, 1024);
            MPS_ARGS_ADD(args, MPS_KEY_EXTEND_BY, 1024 * 1024);
            res = mps_pool_create_k(&pool, arena, mps_class_mfs(), args);
        } MPS_ARGS_END(args);

    .. deprecated:: starting with version 1.112.

        When using :c:func:`mps_pool_create`, pass the segment size,
        mean size, and maximum size like this::

            mps_res_t mps_pool_create(mps_pool_t *pool_o, mps_arena_t arena, 
                                      mps_class_t mps_class_mv(),
                                      size_t extend_size,
                                      size_t average_size,
                                      mps_size_t maximum_size)


.. c:function:: mps_class_t mps_class_mv_debug(void)

    A :ref:`debugging <topic-debugging>` version of the MV pool
    class.

    When creating a debugging MV pool, :c:func:`mps_pool_create_k`
    takes four keyword arguments: :c:macro:`MPS_KEY_EXTEND_SIZE`,
    :c:macro:`MPS_KEY_MEAN_SIZE`, :c:macro:`MPS_KEY_MAX_SIZE` are as
    described above, and :c:macro:`MPS_KEY_POOL_DEBUG_OPTIONS`
    specifies the debugging options. See :c:type:`mps_debug_option_s`.

    .. deprecated:: starting with version 1.112.

        When using :c:func:`mps_pool_create`, pass the debugging
        options, segment size, mean size, and maximum size like this::

            mps_res_t mps_pool_create(mps_pool_t *pool_o, mps_arena_t arena, 
                                      mps_class_t mps_class_mv_debug(),
                                      mps_debug_option_s debug_option,
                                      mps_size_t extend_size,
                                      mps_size_t average_size,
                                      mps_size_t maximum_size)


.. index::
   pair: MV; introspection

MV introspection
----------------

::

   #include "mpscmv.h"

.. c:function:: size_t mps_mv_free_size(mps_pool_t pool)

    Return the total amount of free space in an MV pool.

    ``pool`` is the MV pool.

    Returns the total free space in the pool, in :term:`bytes (1)`.


.. c:function:: size_t mps_mv_size(mps_pool_t pool)

    Return the total size of an MV pool.

    ``pool`` is the MV pool.

    Returns the total size of the pool, in :term:`bytes (1)`. This
    is the sum of allocated space and free space.

Commit message:

Alignment is now configurable for MV pools using MPS_KEY_ALIGN. MVFF and MVT support alignments down to FreelistMinimumAlignment. For MVFF and MVT, alignments that are too small are rounded up automatically, to make it easier to write portable programs.
Copied from Perforce
 Change: 185369
 ServerID: perforce.ravenbrook.com

manual/source/pool/mv.rst, after:

.. index::
   single: MV
   single: pool class; MV

.. _pool-mv:

MV (Manual Variable)
====================

.. deprecated:: starting with version 1.111.

    :ref:`pool-mvff` or :ref:`pool-mvt` should be used instead.

**MV** is a general-purpose :term:`manually managed <manual memory
management>` :term:`pool class` that manages :term:`blocks` of
variable size.


.. index::
   single: MV; properties

MV properties
-------------

* Supports allocation via :c:func:`mps_alloc` and deallocation via
  :c:func:`mps_free`.

* Does not support allocation via :term:`allocation points`.

* Does not support :term:`allocation frames`.

* Supports :term:`segregated allocation caches`.

* There are no garbage collections in this pool.

* Blocks may not contain :term:`references` to blocks in automatically
  managed pools (unless these are registered as :term:`roots`).

* Allocations may be variable in size.

* The :term:`alignment` of blocks is configurable.

* Blocks do not have :term:`dependent objects`.

* Blocks are not automatically :term:`reclaimed`.

* Blocks are not :term:`scanned <scan>`.

* Blocks are not protected by :term:`barriers (1)`.

* Blocks do not :term:`move <moving garbage collector>`.

* Blocks may not be registered for :term:`finalization`.

* Blocks must not belong to an :term:`object format`.


.. index::
   single: MV; interface

MV interface
------------

::

   #include "mpscmv.h"

.. c:function:: mps_class_t mps_class_mv(void)

    Return the :term:`pool class` for an MV (Manual Variable)
    :term:`pool`.

    When creating an MV pool, :c:func:`mps_pool_create_k` may take
    the following :term:`keyword arguments`:

    * :c:macro:`MPS_KEY_ALIGN` (type :c:type:`mps_align_t`, default is
      :c:macro:`MPS_PF_ALIGN`) is the
      :term:`alignment` of addresses for allocation (and freeing) in
      the pool. If an unaligned size is passed to :c:func:`mps_alloc` or
      :c:func:`mps_free`, it will be rounded up to the pool's alignment.

    * :c:macro:`MPS_KEY_EXTEND_BY` (type :c:type:`size_t`, default 65536) is the
      :term:`size` of segment that the pool will request from the
      :term:`arena`.

    * :c:macro:`MPS_KEY_MEAN_SIZE` (type :c:type:`size_t`, default 32) is the
      predicted mean size of blocks that will be allocated from the
      pool.

    * :c:macro:`MPS_KEY_MAX_SIZE` (type :c:type:`size_t`, default 65536) is the
      predicted maximum size of blocks that will be allocated from the
      pool.

    The mean and maximum sizes are *hints* to the MPS: the pool will be
    less efficient if these are wrong, but nothing will break.

    For example::

        MPS_ARGS_BEGIN(args) {
            MPS_ARGS_ADD(args, MPS_KEY_MEAN_SIZE, 32);
            MPS_ARGS_ADD(args, MPS_KEY_MAX_SIZE, 1024);
            MPS_ARGS_ADD(args, MPS_KEY_EXTEND_BY, 1024 * 1024);
            res = mps_pool_create_k(&pool, arena, mps_class_mfs(), args);
        } MPS_ARGS_END(args);

    .. deprecated:: starting with version 1.112.

        When using :c:func:`mps_pool_create`, pass the segment size,
        mean size, and maximum size like this::

            mps_res_t mps_pool_create(mps_pool_t *pool_o, mps_arena_t arena, 
                                      mps_class_t mps_class_mv(),
                                      size_t extend_size,
                                      size_t average_size,
                                      mps_size_t maximum_size)


.. c:function:: mps_class_t mps_class_mv_debug(void)

    A :ref:`debugging <topic-debugging>` version of the MV pool
    class.

    When creating a debugging MV pool, :c:func:`mps_pool_create_k`
    takes the following keyword arguments: :c:macro:`MPS_KEY_ALIGN`,
    :c:macro:`MPS_KEY_EXTEND_SIZE`, :c:macro:`MPS_KEY_MEAN_SIZE`,
    :c:macro:`MPS_KEY_MAX_SIZE` are as described above, and
    :c:macro:`MPS_KEY_POOL_DEBUG_OPTIONS` specifies the debugging
    options. See :c:type:`mps_debug_option_s`.

    .. deprecated:: starting with version 1.112.

        When using :c:func:`mps_pool_create`, pass the debugging
        options, segment size, mean size, and maximum size like this::

            mps_res_t mps_pool_create(mps_pool_t *pool_o, mps_arena_t arena, 
                                      mps_class_t mps_class_mv_debug(),
                                      mps_debug_option_s debug_option,
                                      mps_size_t extend_size,
                                      mps_size_t average_size,
                                      mps_size_t maximum_size)


.. index::
   pair: MV; introspection

MV introspection
----------------

::

   #include "mpscmv.h"

.. c:function:: size_t mps_mv_free_size(mps_pool_t pool)

    Return the total amount of free space in an MV pool.

    ``pool`` is the MV pool.

    Returns the total free space in the pool, in :term:`bytes (1)`.


.. c:function:: size_t mps_mv_size(mps_pool_t pool)

    Return the total size of an MV pool.

    ``pool`` is the MV pool.

    Returns the total size of the pool, in :term:`bytes (1)`. This
    is the sum of allocated space and free space.
