manual/source/topic/telemetry.rst, before:

.. highlight:: none

.. _topic-telemetry:

Telemetry
=========

In its :term:`cool` and :term:`hot` :term:`varieties`, the MPS is
capable of outputting a configurable stream of events to assist with
debugging and profiling.

The selection of events that appear in the stream is controlled by the
environment variable :envvar:`MPS_TELEMETRY_CONTROL` (by default
none), and the stream is written to the file named by the environment
variable :envvar:`MPS_TELEMETRY_FILENAME` (by default ``mpsio.log``).

The telemetry system writes blocks of binary output, and is fast
enough to be left turned on in production code (the :term:`hot`
variety avoids emitting events on the :term:`critical path`), which
can be useful for diagnosing memory management problems in production
environments.

The reporting of garbage collection statistics hasn't always been
suitable for deployment. John McCarthy described the first on-line
demonstration of :term:`Lisp` in an appendix to his paper
":ref:`History of Lisp <MCCARTHY79>`":

    Everything was going well, if slowly, when suddenly the
    Flexowriter began to type (at ten characters per second) ::

        THE GARBAGE COLLECTOR HAS BEEN CALLED.
        SOME INTERESTING STATISTICS ARE AS FOLLOWS:

    and on and on and on. The garbage collector was quite new at the
    time, we were rather proud of it and curious about it, and our
    normal output was on a line printer, so it printed a full page
    every time it was called giving how many words were marked and how
    many were collected and the size of list space, etc. [...]

    Nothing had ever been said about the garbage collector, and I
    could only imagine the reaction of the audience. We were already
    behind time on a tight schedule, it was clear that typing out the
    garbage collector message would take all the remaining time
    allocated to the demonstration, and both the lecturer and the
    audience were incapacitated with laughter. I think some of them
    thought we were victims of a practical joker.


.. index::
   single: telemetry; utilities

Telemetry utilities
-------------------

The telemetry system relies on three utility programs:

* :ref:`mpseventcnv <telemetry-mpseventcnv>` decodes the
  machine-dependent binary event stream into a portable text format.
  It must be compiled for the same architecture as the MPS-linked
  program whose event stream it decodes.

* :ref:`mpseventtxt <telemetry-mpseventtxt>` takes the output of
  :ref:`mpseventcnv <telemetry-mpseventcnv>` and outputs it in a more
  human-readable form.

* :ref:`mpseventsql <telemetry-mpseventsql>` takes the output of
  :ref:`mpseventcnv <telemetry-mpseventcnv>` and loads it into a
  SQLite database for further analysis.

You must build and install these programs as described in
:ref:`guide-build`. These programs are described in more detail below.


.. index::
   single: telemetry; example
   single: Scheme; telemetry

Example
-------

Here's an example of turning on telemetry in the debugger and then
encountering a corrupted object::

    $ gdb ./scheme
    GNU gdb 6.3.50-20050815 (Apple version gdb-1820) (Sat Jun 16 02:40:11 UTC 2012)
    [...]
    (gdb) set environment MPS_TELEMETRY_CONTROL=all
    (gdb) run
    Starting program: example/scheme/scheme 
    Reading symbols for shared libraries +............................. done
    MPS Toy Scheme Example
    [...]
    7944, 0> (gc)
    [...]
    7968, 1> foo
    Assertion failed: (TYPE(frame) == TYPE_PAIR), function lookup_in_frame, file scheme.c, line 1066.

    Program received signal SIGABRT, Aborted.
    0x00007fff91aeed46 in __kill ()

At this point there's still output in the MPS's internal event
buffers, which needs to be flushed. It would be a good idea to add a
call to :c:func:`mps_telemetry_flush` to the error handler, but for
now we can just call it directly from the debugger::

    (gdb) print mps_telemetry_flush()
    $1 = void

The MPS writes the telemetry to the log in an encoded form for speed.
It can be decoded using the :ref:`mpseventcnv <telemetry-mpseventcnv>`
and :ref:`mpseventtxt <telemetry-mpseventtxt>` programs::

    (gdb) shell mpseventcnv | sort | mpseventtxt > mpsio.txt

The ``sort`` is useful because the events are not necessarily written
to the telemetry file in time order, but each event starts with a
timestamp so sorting makes a time series. The decoded events look like
this, with the timestamp in the first column, the event type in the
second column, and then addresses or other data related to the event
in the remaining columns. The source of the timestamp depends on the
platform; it may be a low-cost high-resolution processor timer, such
as the `Time Stamp Counter
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Time_Stamp_Counter>`_ on IA-32 and
x86-64, if one is available. All numbers are given in hexadecimal. ::

    000AE03973336E3C 002B VMCreate            vm:00000001003FC000 base:00000001003FD000 limit:00000001003FE000 
    000AE0397333BC6D 002D VMMap               vm:00000001003FC000 base:00000001003FD000 limit:00000001003FE000 
    000AE0397334DF9F 001A Intern              stringId:0000000000000002 string:"Reservoir" 
    000AE0397334E0A0 001B Label               address:00000001078C85B8["Reservoir"] stringId:0000000000000002 
    000AE03973352375 0015 PoolInit            pool:00000001003FD328 arena:00000001003FD000 poolClass:00000001078C85B8["Reservoir"] 
    000AE039733592F9 002B VMCreate            vm:00000001003FE000 base:00000001003FF000 limit:000000010992F000 
    000AE0397335C8B5 002D VMMap               vm:00000001003FE000 base:00000001003FF000 limit:0000000107930000 
    000AE03973361D5A 0005 ArenaCreateVM       arena:00000001003FD000 userSize:0000000002000000 chunkSize:0000000002000000 

You can search through the telemetry for events related to particular
addresses of interest.

In the example, we might look for events related to the address of the
corrupted ``frame`` object::

    (gdb) frame 3
    #3  0x0000000100003f55 in lookup_in_frame (frame=0x1003fa7d0, symbol=0x1003faf20) at scheme.c:1066
    1066            assert(TYPE(frame) == TYPE_PAIR);
    (gdb) print frame
    $2 = (obj_t) 0x1003fa7d0
    (gdb) shell grep -i 1003fa7d0 mpsio.txt || echo not found
    not found

There are no events related to this address, so in particular this
address was never fixed (no ``TraceFix`` event).

.. note::

    You may find it useful to add the command::

        set environment MPS_TELEMETRY_CONTROL=all

    to your ``.gdbinit``.


.. index::
   single: telemetry; event categories
   single: event category

Event categories
----------------

The "bit" column gives the bit number in the :term:`telemetry filter`.
These numbers are liable to change, but the current meanings (zero
being the least significant bit) are:

===  ==========  ========================================================
Bit  Name        Description
===  ==========  ========================================================
0    ``Arena``   Per space or :term:`arena`.
1    ``Pool``    Per :term:`pool`.
2    ``Trace``   Per :term:`trace` or scan.
3    ``Seg``     Per :term:`page` (segment).
4    ``Ref``     Per :term:`reference` or :term:`fix`.
5    ``Object``  Per allocation, :term:`block`, or :term:`object`.
6    ``User``    User-invoked events: see :c:func:`mps_telemetry_intern`.
===  ==========  ========================================================


.. index::
   single: telemetry; environment variables

Environment variables
---------------------

In the ANSI :term:`plinth` (the plinth that comes as default with the
MPS), these two environment variables control the behaviour of the
telemetry feature.

.. envvar:: MPS_TELEMETRY_CONTROL

    The event categories which should be included in the telemetry
    stream.

    If its value can be interpreted as a number, then this number
    represents the set of event categories as a :term:`bitmap`. For
    example, this turns on the ``Pool`` and ``Seg`` event categories::

        MPS_TELEMETRY_CONTROL=6

    Otherwise, the value is split into words at spaces, and any word
    that names an event category turns it on. For example::

        MPS_TELEMETRY_CONTROL="arena pool trace"

    The special event category ``all`` turns on all events.

.. envvar:: MPS_TELEMETRY_FILENAME

    The name of the file to which the telemetry stream should be
    written. Defaults to ``mpsio.log``. For example::

        MPS_TELEMETRY_FILENAME=$(mktemp -t mps)

In addition, the following environment variable controls the behaviour
of the :ref:`mpseventsql <telemetry-mpseventsql>` program.

.. envvar:: MPS_TELEMETRY_DATABASE

    The name of a SQLite database file that will be updated with the
    events from the decoded telemetry stream, if it is not specified
    with the ``-d`` option. If this variable is not assigned,
    ``mpsevent.db`` is used.


.. index::
   single: telemetry; decoding event stream

.. _telemetry-mpseventcnv:

Decoding the telemetry stream
-----------------------------

The MPS writes the telemetry stream in a binary encoded format for
speed. The encoding is specific to the platform the program was
running on, and so the output needs to be decoded before it can be
processed.

The decoding takes place in two stages. First, the program
:program:`mpseventcnv` converts the binary encoded format into a
portable text format suitable for input to one of the second-stage
tools (:ref:`mpseventtxt <telemetry-mpseventtxt>` and
:ref:`mpseventsql <telemetry-mpseventsql>`).

.. program:: mpseventcnv

.. option:: -f <filename>

    The name of the file containing the telemetry stream to decode.
    Defaults to ``mpsio.log``.
    
.. option:: -h

    Help: print a usage message to standard output.

.. note::

    :program:`mpseventcnv` can only read telemetry streams that were
    written by an MPS compiled on the same platform.

Here's some example output. The first column contains the timestamp of
the event, the second column contains the event type, and remaining
columns contain parameters related to the event. ::

    000AE03973336E3C 2B 1003FC000 1003FD000 1003FE000
    000AE0397333BC6D 2D 1003FC000 1003FD000 1003FE000
    000AE0397334DF9F 1A 2 "Reservoir"
    000AE0397334E0A0 1B 1078C85B8 2
    000AE03973352375 15 1003FD328 1003FD000 1078C85B8
    000AE039733592F9 2B 1003FE000 1003FF000 10992F000
    000AE0397335C8B5 2D 1003FE000 1003FF000 107930000
    000AE03973361D5A 5 1003FD000 2000000 2000000


.. index::
   single: telemetry; making event stream readable

.. _telemetry-mpseventtxt:

Making the telemetry stream readable
------------------------------------

The output of :ref:`mpseventcnv <telemetry-mpseventcnv>` can be made
more readable by passing it through :program:`mpseventtxt`, which
takes the following options:

.. program:: mpseventtxt

.. option:: -l <filename>

    The name of a file containing telemetry events that have been
    decoded by :ref:`mpseventcnv <telemetry-mpseventcnv>`. Defaults to
    standard input.

.. option:: -h

    Help: print a usage message to standard output.

For example, here's the result of passing the output shown above
through :program:`mpseventtxt`::

    000AE03973336E3C 002B VMCreate            vm:00000001003FC000 base:00000001003FD000 limit:00000001003FE000 
    000AE0397333BC6D 002D VMMap               vm:00000001003FC000 base:00000001003FD000 limit:00000001003FE000 
    000AE0397334DF9F 001A Intern              stringId:0000000000000002 string:"Reservoir" 
    000AE0397334E0A0 001B Label               address:00000001078C85B8["Reservoir"] stringId:0000000000000002 
    000AE03973352375 0015 PoolInit            pool:00000001003FD328 arena:00000001003FD000 poolClass:00000001078C85B8["Reservoir"] 
    000AE039733592F9 002B VMCreate            vm:00000001003FE000 base:00000001003FF000 limit:000000010992F000 
    000AE0397335C8B5 002D VMMap               vm:00000001003FE000 base:00000001003FF000 limit:0000000107930000 
    000AE03973361D5A 0005 ArenaCreateVM       arena:00000001003FD000 userSize:0000000002000000 chunkSize:0000000002000000 


.. index::
   single: telemetry; loading into SQLite

.. _telemetry-mpseventsql:

Loading the telemetry stream into SQLite
----------------------------------------

The decoded telemetry stream (as output by :ref:`mpseventcnv
<telemetry-mpseventcnv>`) can be loaded into a SQLite database for
further analysis by running :program:`mpseventsql`.

:program:`mpseventsql` takes the following options:

.. program:: mpseventsql

.. option:: -i <filename>

    The name of a file containing a decoded telemetry stream. Defaults
    to standard input.

.. option:: -o <filename>

    The name of a SQLite database file that will be updated with the
    events from the decoded telemetry stream specified by the ``-l``
    option. The database will be created if it does not exist. If not
    specified, the file named by the environment variable
    :envvar:`MPS_TELEMETRY_DATABASE` is used; if this variable is not
    assigned, ``mpsevent.db`` is used.

    Updating a database with events from a file is idempotent unless
    the ``-f`` option is specified.

.. option:: -d

    Delete the database before importing.

.. option:: -f

    Forces the database to be updated with events from the decoded
    telemetry stream specified by the ``-i`` option, even if those
    events have previously been added.

.. option:: -v

    Increase the verbosity. With one or more ``-v`` options,
    :program:`mpseventsql` prints informative messages to standard
    error. Verbosity levels up to 3 (``-vvv``) produce successively
    more detailed information.

    This option implies ``-p``.

.. option:: -p

    Show progress by printing a dot to standard output for every
    100,000 events processed.

.. option:: -t

    Run internal tests.

.. option:: -r

    Rebuild the tables ``event_kind``, ``event_type``, and
    ``event_param``. (This is necessary if you changed the event
    descriptions in ``eventdef.h``.)


.. index::
   single: telemetry; interface

Telemetry interface
-------------------

.. c:function:: void mps_telemetry_flush(void)

    Flush the internal event buffers into the :term:`telemetry stream`.

    This function also calls :c:func:`mps_io_flush` on the event
    stream itself. This ensures that even the latest events are now
    properly recorded, should the :term:`client program` terminate
    (uncontrollably as a result of a bug, for example) or some
    interactive tool require access to the telemetry stream.

    .. note::

        Unless all :term:`arenas` are properly destroyed (by calling
        :c:func:`mps_arena_destroy`), there are likely to be unflushed
        telemetry events when the program finishes. So in the case of
        abnormal program termination such as a fatal exception, you
        may want to call :c:func:`mps_telemetry_flush` explicitly.


.. c:function:: mps_word_t mps_telemetry_get(void)

    Return the :term:`telemetry filter`.


.. c:function:: void mps_telemetry_set(mps_word_t set_mask)

    Set bits in the :term:`telemetry filter`.

    ``set_mask`` is a :term:`bitmask` indicating the bits in the
    telemetry filter that should be set.


.. c:function:: void mps_telemetry_reset(mps_word_t reset_mask)

    Reset bits in the :term:`telemetry filter`.

    ``reset_mask`` is a :term:`bitmask` indicating the bits in the
    telemetry filter that should be reset.


.. index::
   pair: telemetry; labels

Telemetry labels
----------------

Telemetry labels allow the :term:`client program` to associate strings
with addresses in the telemetry stream. The string must first be
*interned* by calling :c:func:`mps_telemetry_intern`, returning a
label, and then the address can be associated with the label by
calling :c:func:`mps_telemetry_label`.

Typical uses of telemetry labels include:

* labelling pools with a human-meaningful name;

* labelling allocated objects with their type, class, or other description.

It is necessary to enable ``User`` events in the :term:`telemetry
filter` in order for telemetry labels to work. For example::

    mps_label_t label;
    mps_telemetry_set(1 << 6);
    label = mps_telemetry_intern("symbol pool");
    mps_telemetry_label(symbol_pool, label);

Labels are represented by the type :c:type:`mps_label_t`. These are
unsigned integers. After processing by :ref:`mpseventsql
<telemetry-mpseventsql>`, the association of addresses with labels
appears in the ``EVENT_Label`` table, and the association of labels
with strings appears in the ``EVENT_Intern`` table. These can then be
used in queries, for example:

.. code-block:: sql

    /* Pool name and creation time */
    SELECT I.string, P.time
    FROM EVENT_PoolInit AS P,
         EVENT_Label AS L,
         EVENT_Intern AS I
    WHERE I.stringId = L.stringId AND L.address = P.pool;


.. c:function:: mps_label_t mps_telemetry_intern(const char *label)

    Registers a string with the MPS, and receives a :term:`telemetry
    label`, suitable for passing to :c:func:`mps_telemetry_label`.

    ``label`` is a NUL-terminated string. Its length should not exceed
    256 characters, including the terminating NUL.

    Returns a telemetry label: a unique identifier that may be used to
    represent the string in future.

    The intention of this function is to provide an identifier that
    can be used to concisely represent a string for the purposes of
    :c:func:`mps_telemetry_label`. 

    .. note::

        If the ``User`` event category is not turned on in the
        :term:`telemetry filter` (via :c:func:`mps_telemetry_control`)
        then the string is not sent to the telemetry stream. A label
        is still returned in this case, but it is useless.


.. c:function:: void mps_telemetry_label(mps_addr_t addr, mps_label_t label)

    Associate a telemetry label returned from
    :c:func:`mps_telemetry_intern` with an address.

    ``addr`` is an address.

    ``label`` is a telemetry label returned from
    :c:func:`mps_telemetry_intern`.

    The label will be associated with the address when it appears in
    the :term:`telemetry stream`.

    .. note::

        If the ``User`` event category is not turned on in the
        :term:`telemetry filter` (via :c:func:`mps_telemetry_control`)
        then calling this function has no effect.


.. index::
   pair: telemetry; customizing

Customizing the telemetry system
--------------------------------

If you need the telemetry system to support features not described
here (for example, you need to transmit telemetry data over a network
rather than writing it to a file on the local filesystem) then you may
be able to do so by providing your own implementation of the
:ref:`topic-plinth-io`.

When it first needs to output telemetry, the MPS call the plinth
function :c:func:`mps_io_create` to create an I/O stream. It then
calls :c:func:`mps_io_write` to write binary data to the stream
and :c:func:`mps_io_flush` to flush the stream in response to
:c:func:`mps_telemetry_flush`. By providing your own implementations
of these functions, you can direct the telemetry stream wherever you
like.

See :ref:`topic-plinth` for details.

Commit message:

Add interface to allocation point logging.
Copied from Perforce
 Change: 188369
 ServerID: perforce.ravenbrook.com

manual/source/topic/telemetry.rst, after:

.. highlight:: none

.. _topic-telemetry:

Telemetry
=========

In its :term:`cool` and :term:`hot` :term:`varieties`, the MPS is
capable of outputting a configurable stream of events to assist with
debugging and profiling.

The selection of events that appear in the stream is controlled by the
environment variable :envvar:`MPS_TELEMETRY_CONTROL` (by default
none), and the stream is written to the file named by the environment
variable :envvar:`MPS_TELEMETRY_FILENAME` (by default ``mpsio.log``).

The telemetry system writes blocks of binary output, and is fast
enough to be left turned on in production code (the :term:`hot`
variety avoids emitting events on the :term:`critical path`), which
can be useful for diagnosing memory management problems in production
environments.

The reporting of garbage collection statistics hasn't always been
suitable for deployment. John McCarthy described the first on-line
demonstration of :term:`Lisp` in an appendix to his paper
":ref:`History of Lisp <MCCARTHY79>`":

    Everything was going well, if slowly, when suddenly the
    Flexowriter began to type (at ten characters per second) ::

        THE GARBAGE COLLECTOR HAS BEEN CALLED.
        SOME INTERESTING STATISTICS ARE AS FOLLOWS:

    and on and on and on. The garbage collector was quite new at the
    time, we were rather proud of it and curious about it, and our
    normal output was on a line printer, so it printed a full page
    every time it was called giving how many words were marked and how
    many were collected and the size of list space, etc. [...]

    Nothing had ever been said about the garbage collector, and I
    could only imagine the reaction of the audience. We were already
    behind time on a tight schedule, it was clear that typing out the
    garbage collector message would take all the remaining time
    allocated to the demonstration, and both the lecturer and the
    audience were incapacitated with laughter. I think some of them
    thought we were victims of a practical joker.


.. index::
   single: telemetry; utilities

Telemetry utilities
-------------------

The telemetry system relies on three utility programs:

* :ref:`mpseventcnv <telemetry-mpseventcnv>` decodes the
  machine-dependent binary event stream into a portable text format.
  It must be compiled for the same architecture as the MPS-linked
  program whose event stream it decodes.

* :ref:`mpseventtxt <telemetry-mpseventtxt>` takes the output of
  :ref:`mpseventcnv <telemetry-mpseventcnv>` and outputs it in a more
  human-readable form.

* :ref:`mpseventsql <telemetry-mpseventsql>` takes the output of
  :ref:`mpseventcnv <telemetry-mpseventcnv>` and loads it into a
  SQLite database for further analysis.

You must build and install these programs as described in
:ref:`guide-build`. These programs are described in more detail below.


.. index::
   single: telemetry; example
   single: Scheme; telemetry

Example
-------

Here's an example of turning on telemetry in the debugger and then
encountering a corrupted object::

    $ gdb ./scheme
    GNU gdb 6.3.50-20050815 (Apple version gdb-1820) (Sat Jun 16 02:40:11 UTC 2012)
    [...]
    (gdb) set environment MPS_TELEMETRY_CONTROL=all
    (gdb) run
    Starting program: example/scheme/scheme 
    Reading symbols for shared libraries +............................. done
    MPS Toy Scheme Example
    [...]
    7944, 0> (gc)
    [...]
    7968, 1> foo
    Assertion failed: (TYPE(frame) == TYPE_PAIR), function lookup_in_frame, file scheme.c, line 1066.

    Program received signal SIGABRT, Aborted.
    0x00007fff91aeed46 in __kill ()

At this point there's still output in the MPS's internal event
buffers, which needs to be flushed. It would be a good idea to add a
call to :c:func:`mps_telemetry_flush` to the error handler, but for
now we can just call it directly from the debugger::

    (gdb) print mps_telemetry_flush()
    $1 = void

The MPS writes the telemetry to the log in an encoded form for speed.
It can be decoded using the :ref:`mpseventcnv <telemetry-mpseventcnv>`
and :ref:`mpseventtxt <telemetry-mpseventtxt>` programs::

    (gdb) shell mpseventcnv | sort | mpseventtxt > mpsio.txt

The ``sort`` is useful because the events are not necessarily written
to the telemetry file in time order, but each event starts with a
timestamp so sorting makes a time series. The decoded events look like
this, with the timestamp in the first column, the event type in the
second column, and then addresses or other data related to the event
in the remaining columns. The source of the timestamp depends on the
platform; it may be a low-cost high-resolution processor timer, such
as the `Time Stamp Counter
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Time_Stamp_Counter>`_ on IA-32 and
x86-64, if one is available. All numbers are given in hexadecimal. ::

    000AE03973336E3C 002B VMCreate            vm:00000001003FC000 base:00000001003FD000 limit:00000001003FE000 
    000AE0397333BC6D 002D VMMap               vm:00000001003FC000 base:00000001003FD000 limit:00000001003FE000 
    000AE0397334DF9F 001A Intern              stringId:0000000000000002 string:"Reservoir" 
    000AE0397334E0A0 001B Label               address:00000001078C85B8["Reservoir"] stringId:0000000000000002 
    000AE03973352375 0015 PoolInit            pool:00000001003FD328 arena:00000001003FD000 poolClass:00000001078C85B8["Reservoir"] 
    000AE039733592F9 002B VMCreate            vm:00000001003FE000 base:00000001003FF000 limit:000000010992F000 
    000AE0397335C8B5 002D VMMap               vm:00000001003FE000 base:00000001003FF000 limit:0000000107930000 
    000AE03973361D5A 0005 ArenaCreateVM       arena:00000001003FD000 userSize:0000000002000000 chunkSize:0000000002000000 

You can search through the telemetry for events related to particular
addresses of interest.

In the example, we might look for events related to the address of the
corrupted ``frame`` object::

    (gdb) frame 3
    #3  0x0000000100003f55 in lookup_in_frame (frame=0x1003fa7d0, symbol=0x1003faf20) at scheme.c:1066
    1066            assert(TYPE(frame) == TYPE_PAIR);
    (gdb) print frame
    $2 = (obj_t) 0x1003fa7d0
    (gdb) shell grep -i 1003fa7d0 mpsio.txt || echo not found
    not found

There are no events related to this address, so in particular this
address was never fixed (no ``TraceFix`` event).

.. note::

    You may find it useful to add the command::

        set environment MPS_TELEMETRY_CONTROL=all

    to your ``.gdbinit``.


.. index::
   single: telemetry; event categories
   single: event category

Event categories
----------------

The "bit" column gives the bit number in the :term:`telemetry filter`.
These numbers are liable to change, but the current meanings (zero
being the least significant bit) are:

===  ==========  ========================================================
Bit  Name        Description
===  ==========  ========================================================
0    ``Arena``   Per space or :term:`arena`.
1    ``Pool``    Per :term:`pool`.
2    ``Trace``   Per :term:`trace` or scan.
3    ``Seg``     Per :term:`page` (segment).
4    ``Ref``     Per :term:`reference` or :term:`fix`.
5    ``Object``  Per allocation [1]_, :term:`block`, or :term:`object`.
6    ``User``    User-invoked events: see :c:func:`mps_telemetry_intern`.
===  ==========  ========================================================

.. note::

    .. [1] Allocations on an :term:`allocation point` via
           :c:func:`mps_reserve` and :c:func:`mps_commit` are not
           logged to the telemetry stream, even if the ``Object``
           category is enabled, unless the
           :c:macro:`MPS_KEY_AP_LOGGED` keyword argument was set to
           true when the allocation point was created. See
           :c:func:`mps_ap_create_k` for details.


.. index::
   single: telemetry; environment variables

Environment variables
---------------------

In the ANSI :term:`plinth` (the plinth that comes as default with the
MPS), these two environment variables control the behaviour of the
telemetry feature.

.. envvar:: MPS_TELEMETRY_CONTROL

    The event categories which should be included in the telemetry
    stream.

    If its value can be interpreted as a number, then this number
    represents the set of event categories as a :term:`bitmap`. For
    example, this turns on the ``Pool`` and ``Seg`` event categories::

        MPS_TELEMETRY_CONTROL=6

    Otherwise, the value is split into words at spaces, and any word
    that names an event category turns it on. For example::

        MPS_TELEMETRY_CONTROL="arena pool trace"

    The special event category ``all`` turns on all events.

.. envvar:: MPS_TELEMETRY_FILENAME

    The name of the file to which the telemetry stream should be
    written. Defaults to ``mpsio.log``. For example::

        MPS_TELEMETRY_FILENAME=$(mktemp -t mps)

In addition, the following environment variable controls the behaviour
of the :ref:`mpseventsql <telemetry-mpseventsql>` program.

.. envvar:: MPS_TELEMETRY_DATABASE

    The name of a SQLite database file that will be updated with the
    events from the decoded telemetry stream, if it is not specified
    with the ``-d`` option. If this variable is not assigned,
    ``mpsevent.db`` is used.


.. index::
   single: telemetry; decoding event stream

.. _telemetry-mpseventcnv:

Decoding the telemetry stream
-----------------------------

The MPS writes the telemetry stream in a binary encoded format for
speed. The encoding is specific to the platform the program was
running on, and so the output needs to be decoded before it can be
processed.

The decoding takes place in two stages. First, the program
:program:`mpseventcnv` converts the binary encoded format into a
portable text format suitable for input to one of the second-stage
tools (:ref:`mpseventtxt <telemetry-mpseventtxt>` and
:ref:`mpseventsql <telemetry-mpseventsql>`).

.. program:: mpseventcnv

.. option:: -f <filename>

    The name of the file containing the telemetry stream to decode.
    Defaults to ``mpsio.log``.
    
.. option:: -h

    Help: print a usage message to standard output.

.. note::

    :program:`mpseventcnv` can only read telemetry streams that were
    written by an MPS compiled on the same platform.

Here's some example output. The first column contains the timestamp of
the event, the second column contains the event type, and remaining
columns contain parameters related to the event. ::

    000AE03973336E3C 2B 1003FC000 1003FD000 1003FE000
    000AE0397333BC6D 2D 1003FC000 1003FD000 1003FE000
    000AE0397334DF9F 1A 2 "Reservoir"
    000AE0397334E0A0 1B 1078C85B8 2
    000AE03973352375 15 1003FD328 1003FD000 1078C85B8
    000AE039733592F9 2B 1003FE000 1003FF000 10992F000
    000AE0397335C8B5 2D 1003FE000 1003FF000 107930000
    000AE03973361D5A 5 1003FD000 2000000 2000000


.. index::
   single: telemetry; making event stream readable

.. _telemetry-mpseventtxt:

Making the telemetry stream readable
------------------------------------

The output of :ref:`mpseventcnv <telemetry-mpseventcnv>` can be made
more readable by passing it through :program:`mpseventtxt`, which
takes the following options:

.. program:: mpseventtxt

.. option:: -l <filename>

    The name of a file containing telemetry events that have been
    decoded by :ref:`mpseventcnv <telemetry-mpseventcnv>`. Defaults to
    standard input.

.. option:: -h

    Help: print a usage message to standard output.

For example, here's the result of passing the output shown above
through :program:`mpseventtxt`::

    000AE03973336E3C 002B VMCreate            vm:00000001003FC000 base:00000001003FD000 limit:00000001003FE000 
    000AE0397333BC6D 002D VMMap               vm:00000001003FC000 base:00000001003FD000 limit:00000001003FE000 
    000AE0397334DF9F 001A Intern              stringId:0000000000000002 string:"Reservoir" 
    000AE0397334E0A0 001B Label               address:00000001078C85B8["Reservoir"] stringId:0000000000000002 
    000AE03973352375 0015 PoolInit            pool:00000001003FD328 arena:00000001003FD000 poolClass:00000001078C85B8["Reservoir"] 
    000AE039733592F9 002B VMCreate            vm:00000001003FE000 base:00000001003FF000 limit:000000010992F000 
    000AE0397335C8B5 002D VMMap               vm:00000001003FE000 base:00000001003FF000 limit:0000000107930000 
    000AE03973361D5A 0005 ArenaCreateVM       arena:00000001003FD000 userSize:0000000002000000 chunkSize:0000000002000000 


.. index::
   single: telemetry; loading into SQLite

.. _telemetry-mpseventsql:

Loading the telemetry stream into SQLite
----------------------------------------

The decoded telemetry stream (as output by :ref:`mpseventcnv
<telemetry-mpseventcnv>`) can be loaded into a SQLite database for
further analysis by running :program:`mpseventsql`.

:program:`mpseventsql` takes the following options:

.. program:: mpseventsql

.. option:: -i <filename>

    The name of a file containing a decoded telemetry stream. Defaults
    to standard input.

.. option:: -o <filename>

    The name of a SQLite database file that will be updated with the
    events from the decoded telemetry stream specified by the ``-l``
    option. The database will be created if it does not exist. If not
    specified, the file named by the environment variable
    :envvar:`MPS_TELEMETRY_DATABASE` is used; if this variable is not
    assigned, ``mpsevent.db`` is used.

    Updating a database with events from a file is idempotent unless
    the ``-f`` option is specified.

.. option:: -d

    Delete the database before importing.

.. option:: -f

    Forces the database to be updated with events from the decoded
    telemetry stream specified by the ``-i`` option, even if those
    events have previously been added.

.. option:: -v

    Increase the verbosity. With one or more ``-v`` options,
    :program:`mpseventsql` prints informative messages to standard
    error. Verbosity levels up to 3 (``-vvv``) produce successively
    more detailed information.

    This option implies ``-p``.

.. option:: -p

    Show progress by printing a dot to standard output for every
    100,000 events processed.

.. option:: -t

    Run internal tests.

.. option:: -r

    Rebuild the tables ``event_kind``, ``event_type``, and
    ``event_param``. (This is necessary if you changed the event
    descriptions in ``eventdef.h``.)


.. index::
   single: telemetry; interface

Telemetry interface
-------------------

.. c:function:: void mps_telemetry_flush(void)

    Flush the internal event buffers into the :term:`telemetry stream`.

    This function also calls :c:func:`mps_io_flush` on the event
    stream itself. This ensures that even the latest events are now
    properly recorded, should the :term:`client program` terminate
    (uncontrollably as a result of a bug, for example) or some
    interactive tool require access to the telemetry stream.

    .. note::

        Unless all :term:`arenas` are properly destroyed (by calling
        :c:func:`mps_arena_destroy`), there are likely to be unflushed
        telemetry events when the program finishes. So in the case of
        abnormal program termination such as a fatal exception, you
        may want to call :c:func:`mps_telemetry_flush` explicitly.


.. c:function:: mps_word_t mps_telemetry_get(void)

    Return the :term:`telemetry filter`.


.. c:function:: void mps_telemetry_set(mps_word_t set_mask)

    Set bits in the :term:`telemetry filter`.

    ``set_mask`` is a :term:`bitmask` indicating the bits in the
    telemetry filter that should be set.


.. c:function:: void mps_telemetry_reset(mps_word_t reset_mask)

    Reset bits in the :term:`telemetry filter`.

    ``reset_mask`` is a :term:`bitmask` indicating the bits in the
    telemetry filter that should be reset.


.. index::
   pair: telemetry; labels

Telemetry labels
----------------

Telemetry labels allow the :term:`client program` to associate strings
with addresses in the telemetry stream. The string must first be
*interned* by calling :c:func:`mps_telemetry_intern`, returning a
label, and then the address can be associated with the label by
calling :c:func:`mps_telemetry_label`.

Typical uses of telemetry labels include:

* labelling pools with a human-meaningful name;

* labelling allocated objects with their type, class, or other description.

It is necessary to enable ``User`` events in the :term:`telemetry
filter` in order for telemetry labels to work. For example::

    mps_label_t label;
    mps_telemetry_set(1 << 6);
    label = mps_telemetry_intern("symbol pool");
    mps_telemetry_label(symbol_pool, label);

Labels are represented by the type :c:type:`mps_label_t`. These are
unsigned integers. After processing by :ref:`mpseventsql
<telemetry-mpseventsql>`, the association of addresses with labels
appears in the ``EVENT_Label`` table, and the association of labels
with strings appears in the ``EVENT_Intern`` table. These can then be
used in queries, for example:

.. code-block:: sql

    /* Pool name and creation time */
    SELECT I.string, P.time
    FROM EVENT_PoolInit AS P,
         EVENT_Label AS L,
         EVENT_Intern AS I
    WHERE I.stringId = L.stringId AND L.address = P.pool;


.. c:function:: mps_label_t mps_telemetry_intern(const char *label)

    Registers a string with the MPS, and receives a :term:`telemetry
    label`, suitable for passing to :c:func:`mps_telemetry_label`.

    ``label`` is a NUL-terminated string. Its length should not exceed
    256 characters, including the terminating NUL.

    Returns a telemetry label: a unique identifier that may be used to
    represent the string in future.

    The intention of this function is to provide an identifier that
    can be used to concisely represent a string for the purposes of
    :c:func:`mps_telemetry_label`. 

    .. note::

        If the ``User`` event category is not turned on in the
        :term:`telemetry filter` (via :c:func:`mps_telemetry_control`)
        then the string is not sent to the telemetry stream. A label
        is still returned in this case, but it is useless.


.. c:function:: void mps_telemetry_label(mps_addr_t addr, mps_label_t label)

    Associate a telemetry label returned from
    :c:func:`mps_telemetry_intern` with an address.

    ``addr`` is an address.

    ``label`` is a telemetry label returned from
    :c:func:`mps_telemetry_intern`.

    The label will be associated with the address when it appears in
    the :term:`telemetry stream`.

    .. note::

        If the ``User`` event category is not turned on in the
        :term:`telemetry filter` (via :c:func:`mps_telemetry_control`)
        then calling this function has no effect.


.. index::
   pair: telemetry; customizing

Customizing the telemetry system
--------------------------------

If you need the telemetry system to support features not described
here (for example, you need to transmit telemetry data over a network
rather than writing it to a file on the local filesystem) then you may
be able to do so by providing your own implementation of the
:ref:`topic-plinth-io`.

When it first needs to output telemetry, the MPS call the plinth
function :c:func:`mps_io_create` to create an I/O stream. It then
calls :c:func:`mps_io_write` to write binary data to the stream
and :c:func:`mps_io_flush` to flush the stream in response to
:c:func:`mps_telemetry_flush`. By providing your own implementations
of these functions, you can direct the telemetry stream wherever you
like.

See :ref:`topic-plinth` for details.
