manual/source/topic/thread.rst, before:

.. sources:

    `<https://info.ravenbrook.com/project/mps/master/design/thread-safety/>`_

.. index::
   single: thread

.. _topic-thread:

Threads
=======

.. index::
   single: thread safety

Thread safety
-------------

The MPS is designed to run in an environment with multiple threads all
calling into the MPS. Some code is known to operate with exclusive
access to the data it manipulates (for example, allocation via
:term:`allocation points`, in the common case where the buffer does
not need to be refilled, and :term:`location dependencies`), so this
code is safe. For the rest of the code, shared data structures are
locked by the use of a single lock per :term:`arena`. This lock is
claimed on entry to the MPS and released on exit from it. So there is
at most a single thread (per arena) running "inside" the MPS at a
time.


.. index::
   single: thread; registration

.. _topic-thread-register:

Thread registration
-------------------

In order to scan a thread's registers for references (which happens at
each :term:`flip`), the MPS needs to be able to suspend that thread,
and in order to gain exclusive atomic access to memory in order to
scan it, the MPS needs to be able to suspend all threads that might
access that memory. This means that threads must be registered with
the MPS by calling :c:func:`mps_thread_reg` (and thread roots created;
see :ref:`topic-root-thread`).

For simplicity, we recommend that a thread must be registered with an
:term:`arena` if:

* its registers and control stack form a root (this is enforced by
  :c:func:`mps_root_create_reg`); or

* it reads or writes from a location in an :term:`automatically managed
  <automatic memory management>` :term:`pool` in the arena.

However, some automatically managed pool classes may be more liberal
than this. See the documentation for the pool class.

.. warning::

    On Unix platforms, the MPS suspends and resumes threads by sending
    them signals. There's a shortage of available signals that aren't
    already dedicated to other purposes (for example, LinuxThreads
    uses ``SIGUSR1`` and ``SIGUSR2``), so the MPS uses ``SIGXCPU`` and
    ``SIGXFSZ``. This means that a program that handles these signals
    needs to co-operate with the MPS.

    The mechanism for co-operation is currently undocumented: please
    :ref:`contact us <contact>`.


.. index::
   single: signal; handling
   single: thread; signal handling

Signal handling issues
----------------------

The MPS uses :term:`barriers (1)` to :term:`protect <protection>`
memory from the :term:`client program` and handles the signals that
result from barrier hits.

.. warning::

    The use of barriers has the consequence that a program that
    handles ``SIGBUS`` (on OS X), ``SIGSEGV`` (on FreeBSD or Linux),
    or first-chance exceptions (on Windows) needs to co-operate with
    the MPS.

    The mechanism for co-operation is currently undocumented: please
    :ref:`contact us <contact>`.


.. index::
   single: thread; interface

Thread interface
----------------

.. c:type:: mps_thr_t

    The type of registered :term:`thread` descriptions.

    In a multi-threaded environment where :term:`incremental garbage
    collection` is used, threads must be registered with the MPS by
    calling :c:func:`mps_thread_reg` so that the MPS can suspend them
    as necessary in order to have exclusive access to their state.

    Even in a single-threaded environment it may be necessary to
    register a thread with the MPS so that its stack can be registered
    as a :term:`root` by calling :c:func:`mps_root_create_reg`.


.. c:function:: mps_res_t mps_thread_reg(mps_thr_t *thr_o, mps_arena_t arena)

    Register the current :term:`thread` with an :term:`arena`.

    ``thr_o`` points to a location that will hold the address of the
    registered thread description, if successful.

    ``arena`` is the arena.

    Returns :c:macro:`MPS_RES_OK` if successful, or another
    :term:`result code` if not.

    A thread must be registered with an arena if it ever uses a
    pointer to a location in an :term:`automatically managed
    <automatic memory management>` :term:`pool` belonging to that
    arena.

    .. note::

        It is recommended that all threads be registered with all
        arenas.


.. c:function:: void mps_thread_dereg(mps_thr_t thr)

    Deregister a :term:`thread`.

    ``thr`` is the description of the thread.

    After calling this function, the thread whose registration with an
    :term:`arena` was recorded in ``thr`` must not read or write from
    a location in an :term:`automatically managed <automatic memory
    management>` :term:`pool` belonging to that arena.

    .. note::

        Some pool classes may be more liberal about what a thread may
        do after it has been deregistered. See the documentation for
        the pool class.

    .. note::

        It is recommended that threads be deregistered only when they
        are just about to exit.


.. c:function:: void mps_tramp(void **r_o, mps_tramp_t f, void *p, size_t s)

    .. deprecated:: starting with version 1.111.

    Call a function via the MPS trampoline.

    ``r_o`` points to a location that will store the result of calling
    ``f``.

    ``f`` is the function to call.

    ``p`` and ``s`` are arguments that will be passed to ``f`` each
    time it is called. This is intended to make it easy to pass, for
    example, an array and its size as parameters.

    The MPS relies on :term:`barriers (1)` to protect memory
    that is in an inconsistent state. On some operating systems,
    barrier hits generate exceptions that have to be caught by a
    handler that is on the stack. On these operating systems, any code
    that uses memory managed by the MPS must be called from inside
    such an exception handler, that is, inside a call to
    :c:func:`mps_tramp`.

    If you have multiple threads that run code that uses memory
    managed by the MPS, each thread must execute such code inside a
    call to :c:func:`mps_tramp`.
    
    Starting with version 1.111, this is not required on any operating
    system supported by the MPS.


.. index::
   single: trampoline

.. c:type:: void *(*mps_tramp_t)(void *p, size_t s)

    .. deprecated:: starting with version 1.111.

    The type of a function called by :c:func:`mps_tramp`.

    ``p`` and ``s`` are the corresponding arguments that were passed
    to :c:func:`mps_tramp`.

Commit message:

Warn users not to mask SIGXCPU and SIGXFSZ.

manual/source/topic/thread.rst, after:

.. sources:

    `<https://info.ravenbrook.com/project/mps/master/design/thread-safety/>`_

.. index::
   single: thread

.. _topic-thread:

Threads
=======

.. index::
   single: thread safety

Thread safety
-------------

The MPS is designed to run in an environment with multiple threads all
calling into the MPS. Some code is known to operate with exclusive
access to the data it manipulates (for example, allocation via
:term:`allocation points`, in the common case where the buffer does
not need to be refilled, and :term:`location dependencies`), so this
code is safe. For the rest of the code, shared data structures are
locked by the use of a single lock per :term:`arena`. This lock is
claimed on entry to the MPS and released on exit from it. So there is
at most a single thread (per arena) running "inside" the MPS at a
time.


.. index::
   single: thread; registration

.. _topic-thread-register:

Thread registration
-------------------

In order to scan a thread's registers for references (which happens at
each :term:`flip`), the MPS needs to be able to suspend that thread,
and in order to gain exclusive atomic access to memory in order to
scan it, the MPS needs to be able to suspend all threads that might
access that memory. This means that threads must be registered with
the MPS by calling :c:func:`mps_thread_reg` (and thread roots created;
see :ref:`topic-root-thread`).

For simplicity, we recommend that a thread must be registered with an
:term:`arena` if:

* its registers and control stack form a root (this is enforced by
  :c:func:`mps_root_create_reg`); or

* it reads or writes from a location in an :term:`automatically managed
  <automatic memory management>` :term:`pool` in the arena.

However, some automatically managed pool classes may be more liberal
than this. See the documentation for the pool class.

.. warning::

    On Unix platforms, the MPS suspends and resumes threads by sending
    them signals. There's a shortage of available signals that aren't
    already dedicated to other purposes (for example, LinuxThreads
    uses ``SIGUSR1`` and ``SIGUSR2``), so the MPS uses ``SIGXCPU`` and
    ``SIGXFSZ``. This means that programs must not mask these two
    signals.

    If your program needs to handle these signals, then it must
    co-operate with the MPS. At present, there's no documented
    mechanism for co-operating: if you are in this situation, please
    :ref:`contact us <contact>`.


.. index::
   single: signal; handling
   single: thread; signal handling

Signal handling issues
----------------------

The MPS uses :term:`barriers (1)` to :term:`protect <protection>`
memory from the :term:`client program` and handles the signals that
result from barrier hits.

.. warning::

    Your program must not mask ``SIGBUS`` (on OS X) or ``SIGSEGV`` (on
    FreeBSD or Linux).

    If your program needs to handle these signals, or handle
    first-chance exceptions (on Windows), then it must co-operate with
    the MPS. At present, there's no documented mechanism for
    co-operating: if you are in this situation, please :ref:`contact
    us <contact>`.


.. index::
   single: thread; interface

Thread interface
----------------

.. c:type:: mps_thr_t

    The type of registered :term:`thread` descriptions.

    In a multi-threaded environment where :term:`incremental garbage
    collection` is used, threads must be registered with the MPS by
    calling :c:func:`mps_thread_reg` so that the MPS can suspend them
    as necessary in order to have exclusive access to their state.

    Even in a single-threaded environment it may be necessary to
    register a thread with the MPS so that its stack can be registered
    as a :term:`root` by calling :c:func:`mps_root_create_reg`.


.. c:function:: mps_res_t mps_thread_reg(mps_thr_t *thr_o, mps_arena_t arena)

    Register the current :term:`thread` with an :term:`arena`.

    ``thr_o`` points to a location that will hold the address of the
    registered thread description, if successful.

    ``arena`` is the arena.

    Returns :c:macro:`MPS_RES_OK` if successful, or another
    :term:`result code` if not.

    A thread must be registered with an arena if it ever uses a
    pointer to a location in an :term:`automatically managed
    <automatic memory management>` :term:`pool` belonging to that
    arena.

    .. note::

        It is recommended that all threads be registered with all
        arenas.


.. c:function:: void mps_thread_dereg(mps_thr_t thr)

    Deregister a :term:`thread`.

    ``thr`` is the description of the thread.

    After calling this function, the thread whose registration with an
    :term:`arena` was recorded in ``thr`` must not read or write from
    a location in an :term:`automatically managed <automatic memory
    management>` :term:`pool` belonging to that arena.

    .. note::

        Some pool classes may be more liberal about what a thread may
        do after it has been deregistered. See the documentation for
        the pool class.

    .. note::

        It is recommended that threads be deregistered only when they
        are just about to exit.


.. c:function:: void mps_tramp(void **r_o, mps_tramp_t f, void *p, size_t s)

    .. deprecated:: starting with version 1.111.

    Call a function via the MPS trampoline.

    ``r_o`` points to a location that will store the result of calling
    ``f``.

    ``f`` is the function to call.

    ``p`` and ``s`` are arguments that will be passed to ``f`` each
    time it is called. This is intended to make it easy to pass, for
    example, an array and its size as parameters.

    The MPS relies on :term:`barriers (1)` to protect memory
    that is in an inconsistent state. On some operating systems,
    barrier hits generate exceptions that have to be caught by a
    handler that is on the stack. On these operating systems, any code
    that uses memory managed by the MPS must be called from inside
    such an exception handler, that is, inside a call to
    :c:func:`mps_tramp`.

    If you have multiple threads that run code that uses memory
    managed by the MPS, each thread must execute such code inside a
    call to :c:func:`mps_tramp`.
    
    Starting with version 1.111, this is not required on any operating
    system supported by the MPS.


.. index::
   single: trampoline

.. c:type:: void *(*mps_tramp_t)(void *p, size_t s)

    .. deprecated:: starting with version 1.111.

    The type of a function called by :c:func:`mps_tramp`.

    ``p`` and ``s`` are the corresponding arguments that were passed
    to :c:func:`mps_tramp`.
