.\" -*- Mode: Text -*-
.\"
.\" **********************************************************************
.\" This code was written as part of the CMU Common Lisp project at
.\" Carnegie Mellon University, and has been placed in the public domain.
.\" If you want to use this code or any part of CMU Common Lisp, please contact
.\" Scott Fahlman or slisp-group@cs.cmu.edu.
.\"
.\"$Header: /project/cmucl/cvsroot/src/general-info/cmucl.1,v 1.13 2003/11/11 16:01:14 toy Exp $
.\"
.\" **********************************************************************
.\"
.\"  Man page introduction to CMU CL.
.TH CMUCL 1 "October 15, 1991"
.AT 3
.SH NAME
cmucl \- CMU Common Lisp

.SH DESCRIPTION

CMU Common Lisp is public domain "industrial strength" Common Lisp programming
environment.  Many of the X3j13 changes have been incorporated into CMU CL.
Wherever possible, this has been done so as to transparently allow use of
either CLtL1 or proposed ANSI CL.  Probably the new features most interesting
to users are SETF functions, LOOP and the WITH-COMPILATION-UNIT macro.

.SH HARDWARE REQUIREMENTS

CMU CL is currently available for a variety of Unix workstations.  See the
README file for current platforms.  At least 16 megabytes of memory and 25
megabytes of disk space are recommended.  As usual, more is better.

.SH OVERVIEW
When compared other Common Lisp implementations, CMU CL has
two broad advantages:
.TP 3
\--
The new CMU CL compiler (Python) is more sophisticated than other
Common Lisp compilers.  It both produces better code and is easier to use.
.TP 3
\--
The programming environment based on the Hemlock editor is better
integrated than gnu-emacs based environments.  (Though you can still use
GNU if you want.)
.PP

CMU CL also has significant non-technical advantages:
.TP 3
\--
It has good local support for CMU users, and is well integrated with the
CMU CS environment.
.TP 3
\--
It is public domain, and is freely available to non-CMU sites that aren't
able to afford a site-license for a commercial Lisp.


.SH COMPILER FEATURES

The `Advanced Compiler' chapter of the User's manual extensively discusses
Python's optimization capabilities (See DOCUMENTATION below.)  Here are a few
high points:
.TP 3
\--
Good efficiency and type-checking 
.I at the same time.
Compiling code safe gives a 2x speed reduction at worst.
.TP 3
\--
In safe code, type declarations are verified, allowing declarations to
be debugged in safe code.  When you go to compile unsafe, you know the
declarations are right.
.TP 3
\--
Full source level debugging of compiled code, including display of the
exact call that got an error.
.TP 3
\--
Good efficiency notes that tell you why an operation can't be open coded
or where you are number-consing, and that provide unprecedented source context
.TP 3
\--
Block compilation, partial evaluation, lightweight functions and proper
tail-recursion allow low-cost use of function call abstraction.
.PP

.SH TYPE SUPPORT

.B Important note:
Even debugged programs may contain type errors that remain undetected by
other compilers.  When compiled with type checking suppressed using the
CMU Common Lisp compiler, these type errors may cause said debugged
programs to die strangely.  If type checking is not suppressed, these
programs will die with an explicit type error. 

The most visible way in which Python differs from previous Common Lisp
compilers is that it has a greater knowledge about types and a different
approach to type checking.  In particular, Python implements type checking
which is `eager' and `precise':
.TP 3
\--
Eager in the sense that type checking is done immediately whenever there is
a declaration, rather than being delayed until the the value is actually
used.  For example:
.nf
    (let ((x ...))
.br
      (declare (fixnum x))
.br
      ...)
.br
.fi
Here, the type of the initial value of X must be a FIXNUM or an error will
be signalled.
.TP 3
\--
Precise in the sense that the exact type specified is checked.  For
example, if a variable is declared to be of type (integer 3 7), then the
value must always be an integer between 3 and 7.
.PP

Since Python does more type checking, programs that work fine when compiled
with other compilers may get type errors when compiled with Python.  It is
important to initially compile programs with the default (safe) policy, and
then test this version.  If a program with an erroneous declaration is compiled
with type checking suppressed (due to the SAFETY optimize quality being
reduced), then the type error may cause obscure errors or infinite looping.
See the section `Getting Existing Programs to Run' (6.6) in the compiler
chapter of the user manual.

CMU CL adheres to the X3J13 function type cleanup, which means that quoted
lambda-lists are not of type FUNCTION, and are no longer directly callable.
Use COERCE with the FUNCTION result type.

.SH OPTIMIZATION

Python does many optimizations that are absent or less general in other
Common Lisp compilers:
Proper tail recursion, lightweight function call, block compilation,
inter-procedural type inference, global flow analysis, dynamic type
inference, global register allocation, stack number allocation, control
optimization, integer range analysis, enhanced inline expansion, multiple
value optimization and source-to-source transforms.

Optimization and type-checking are controlled by the OPTIMIZE declaration.  The
default compilation policy is type-safe.

.SH NUMERIC SUPPORT

Python is particular good at number crunching:
.TP 3
\--
Good inline coding of float and 32 bit integer operations, with no
number consing.  This includes all the hardware primitives ROUND,
TRUNCATE, COERCE, as well as important library routines such as
SCALE-FLOAT and DECODE-FLOAT.  Results that don't fit in registers go
on a special number stack.
.TP 3
\--
Full support for IEEE single and double (denorms, +-0, etc.)
.TP 3
\--
In block compiled code, numbers are passed as function arguments and
return values in registers (and without number consing.)
.TP 3
\--
Calls to library functions (SIN, ...) are optimized to a direct call to
the C library routine (with no number consing.)  On hardware with
direct support for such functions, these operations can easily be
open-coded.
.TP 3
\--

Substantially better bignum performance than commercial implementations
(2x-4x).  Bignums implemented in lisp using word integers, so you can roll your
own.
.PP

Python's compiler warnings and efficiency notes are especially valuable in
numeric code.  50+ pages in the user manual describe Python's capabilities in
more detail.


.SH THE DEBUGGER

In addition to a Motif-based windowing interface and a basic command-line
interface, the debugger also has several powerful new features:
.TP 3
\--
The "source" and "vsource" commands print the *precise* original source
form responsible for the error or pending function call.  It is no longer
necessary to guess which call to CAR caused some "not a list" error.
.TP 3
\--
Variables in compiled code can be accessed by name, so the debugger always
evaluates forms in the lexical environment of the current frame.  This 
variable access is robust in the presence of compiler optimization ---
although higher levels of optimization may make variable values unavailable
at some locations in the variable's scope, the debugger always errs on the
side of discretion, refusing to display possibly incorrect values.
.TP 3
\--
Compiled code can be stepped, stopping at each control transfer.
.TP 3
\--
Integration with the Hemlock editor.  In a slave, the "edit" command causes the
editor edit the source for the current code location.  The editor can also send
non-line-mode input to the debugger using C-M-H bindings.  Try apropos "debug"
in Hemlock.
.PP
See the debugger chapter in the user manual for more details.  We are working
on integrating the debugger with Hemlock and X windows.

.SH THE GRAPHICAL INTERFACE

CMU Common Lisp has an interface to Motif which is functionally similar to
CLM, but works better in CMU CL.  See:
.IP "" .2i
.br
    doc/motif-toolkit.doc
.br
    doc/motif-internals.doc
.PP

This motif interface has been used to write the inspector and graphical
debugger.  There is also a Lisp control panel with a simple file management
facility, apropos and inspector dialogs, and controls for setting global
options.

Call INTERFACE:LISP-CONTROL-PANEL to create the control panel.  When
INTERFACE:*INTERFACE-STYLE* is :GRAPHICS (the default) and the DISPLAY
environment variable is defined, the graphical inspector and debugger will be
invoked by INSPECT or when an error is signalled.  Possible values are
:GRAPHICS and :TTY.  If the value is :GRAPHICS, but there is no X display,
then we quietly use the TTY interface.

.SH THE INTERPRETER

As far as Common Lisp semantics are concerned, there is no interpreter; this is
effectively a compile-only implementation.  Forms typed to the read-eval-print
loop or passed to EVAL are in effect compiled before being run.  In
implementation, there is an interpreter, but it operates on the internal
representation produced by the compiler's font-end.

It is not recommended that programs be debugged by running the whole program
interpreted, since Python and the debugger eliminate the main reasons for
debugging using the interpreter:
.TP 3
\--
Compiled code does much more error checking than interpreted code.
.TP 3
\--
It is as easy to debug compiled code as interpreted code.
.PP

Note that the debugger does not currently support single-stepping.  Also, the
interpreter's pre-processing freezes in the macro definitions in effect at the
time an interpreted function is defined.  Until we implement automatic
reprocessing when macros are redefined, it is necessary to re-evaluate the
definition of an interpreted function to cause new macro definitions to be
noticed.

.SH DOCUMENTATION

The CMU CL documentation is printed as tech reports, and is available (at CMU)
in the document room:
.IP "" .2i
.br
CMU Common Lisp User's Manual
.br
Hemlock User's Manual
.br
Hemlock Command Implementor's Manual
.PP

Non-CMU users may get documentation from the doc/ directory in the binary
distribution:
.TP 10n
.BR cmu-user.info
CMU CL User's Manual in Gnu Info format.  The ``cmu-user.info-<N>'' files
are subfiles.  You can either have your EMACS
maintainer install this in the info root, or you can use the info 
``g(...whatever.../doc/cmu-user.info)'' command.
.TP
.BR cmu-user.ps
The CMU CL User's Manual (148 pages) in postscript format.  LaTeX source and
DVI versions are also available.
.TP
.BR release-notes.txt
Information on the changes between releases.
.TP
.BR hemlock-user.ps
Postscript version of the Hemlock User's Manual (124 pages.)
.TP
.BR hemlock-cim.ps
Postscript version of the Hemlock Command Implementor's Manual (96 pages).
.PP
\

.SH SUPPORT

Bug reports should be sent to cmucl-bugs@cs.cmu.edu.  Please consult
your local CMU CL maintainer or Common Lisp expert to verify that 
the problem really is a bug before sending to this list.

The CMU Common Lisp project is no longer funded, so only minimal support is
being done at CMU.  There is a net community of \cmucl{} users and maintainers
who communicate via comp.lang.lisp and the cmucl-bugs@cs.cmu.edu mailing list.

.SH DISTRIBUTION

CMU Common Lisp is a public domain implementation of Common Lisp.  Both sources
and executables are freely available via anonymous FTP; this software is 
"as is", and has no warranty of any kind.  CMU and the authors assume no
responsibility for the consequences of any use of this software.  See the
README file in the distribution for FTP instructions.

.SH ABOUT THE CMU COMMON LISP PROJECT

Organizationally, CMU Common Lisp was a small, mostly autonomous part within
the Mach operating system project.  The CMU CL project was more of a tool
development effort than a research project.  The project started out as Spice
Lisp, which provided a modern Lisp implementation for use in the CMU community.
CMU CL has been under continuous development since the early 1980's (concurrent
with the Common Lisp standardization effort.)  Most of the CMU Common Lisp
implementors are now working on the Gwydion environment for Dylan (see
http://legend.gwydion.cs.cmu.edu:8001/gwydion/.)

CMU CL was funded by DARPA under CMU's "Research on Parallel Computing"
contract.  Rather than doing pure research on programming languages and
environments, the emphasis was on developing practical programming tools.
Sometimes this required new technology, but much of the work was in creating a
Common Lisp environment that incorporates state-of-the-art features from
existing systems (both Lisp and non-Lisp.)

Because sources are freely available, CMU Common Lisp has been ported to
experimental hardware, and used as a basis for research in programming language
and environment construction.

.SH SEE ALSO
lisp(1), README
.br
The ``CMU Common Lisp User's Manual'',
.br
the ``Hemlock User's Manual'', and 
.br
the ``Hemlock Command Implementor's Manual''
