procedure/entry.impl.rst, before:

=================================================
Memory Pool System entry criteria for source code
=================================================

:tag: entry.impl
:type: rule
:status: incomplete
:author: Gavin Matthews
:organization: Harlequin Limited
:date: 1996-07-24
:confidentiality: public
:copyright: See `C. Copyright and License`_
:readership: MPS developers

_`.scope`: These entry criteria are to be used for reviews of code
(see `proc.review.entry.criteria`_).

.. _`proc.review.entry.criteria`: review.rst#51-review-entry.

_`.author`: In the case of code there is often not a clear author.  In
this case, the leader may select one or more people who have edited
the file recently, at their discretion.

_`.auto-check`: Source code should compile without errors.  Lint
should have been run where available.


A. References
-------------

.. [Gilb_93] "Software Inspection"; Tom Gilb, Dorothy Graham; Addison
             Wesley; 1993; ISBN 0-201-63181-4; book.gilb93.


B. Document History
-------------------

Full document history before to 2001 has been lost because this
document was maintained in "Spring", a Lotus Notes information system
at Harlequin Limited.  Ravenbrook Limited did not receive a full
revision history when it acquired the MPS from Harlequin's successor.

==========  =====  ==================================================
1996-07-24  GRM    Created.
2001-10-09  NDL    Imported to Perforce.
2023-01-24  RB_    Integrated to MPS Git and prepared for public use.
==========  =====  ==================================================

.. _RB: mailto:rb@ravenbrook.com


C. Copyright and License
------------------------

Copyright © 2023 `Ravenbrook Limited <https://www.ravenbrook.com/>`_.

Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are
met:

1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
   notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.

2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
   notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
   documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.

THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS
"AS IS" AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT
LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR
A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT
HOLDER OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL,
SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT
LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE,
DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY
THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT
(INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE
OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.

.. end

Commit message:

First pass over entry and exit criteria content, making comments about how to update.

procedure/entry.impl.rst, after:

=================================================
Memory Pool System entry criteria for source code
=================================================

:tag: entry.impl
:type: rule
:status: incomplete
:author: Gavin Matthews
:organization: Harlequin Limited
:date: 1996-07-24
:confidentiality: public
:copyright: See `C. Copyright and License`_
:readership: MPS developers

_`.scope`: These entry criteria are to be used for reviews of code
(see `proc.review.entry.criteria`_).

.. _`proc.review.entry.criteria`: review.rst#51-review-entry.

_`.author`: In the case of code there is often not a clear author.  In
this case, the leader may select one or more people who have edited
the file recently, at their discretion.  [This is out of place.  By
the time entry criteria are being selected, the author role has been
indentified.  See proc.review.role.author.  RB 2023-01-24]

_`.auto-check`: Source code must compile without errors.  Lint should
have been run where available.  [Seems like there are three criteria
here: errors, warnings, and lint.  RB 2023-01-24]


A. References
-------------

.. [Gilb_93] "Software Inspection"; Tom Gilb, Dorothy Graham; Addison
             Wesley; 1993; ISBN 0-201-63181-4; book.gilb93.


B. Document History
-------------------

Full document history before to 2001 has been lost because this
document was maintained in "Spring", a Lotus Notes information system
at Harlequin Limited.  Ravenbrook Limited did not receive a full
revision history when it acquired the MPS from Harlequin's successor.

==========  =====  ==================================================
1996-07-24  GRM    Created.
2001-10-09  NDL    Imported to Perforce.
2023-01-24  RB_    Integrated to MPS Git and prepared for public use.
==========  =====  ==================================================

.. _RB: mailto:rb@ravenbrook.com


C. Copyright and License
------------------------

Copyright © 2023 `Ravenbrook Limited <https://www.ravenbrook.com/>`_.

Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are
met:

1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
   notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.

2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
   notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
   documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.

THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS
"AS IS" AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT
LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR
A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT
HOLDER OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL,
SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT
LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE,
DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY
THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT
(INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE
OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.

.. end
